[SWOOSH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[THEME MUSIC]
>>REGINA MEREDITH:
Dr. Anoop Kumar
was reading a book during
his time as a medical student
when he was suddenly gone.
He was experiencing
himself suddenly
at the center of the sun and the
warm saffron glow, everything
in the universe made of light.
He had to make a choice to stay
there or come back and live
as light, as a doctor
in the ER, ultimately.
So it's so wonderful
to have you here.
We've had some conversations.
The reason I think you came
back to life from that moment
was to start transforming
the medical field.
It's one of the institutions
that just cannot continue as it
is, right?
>>ANOOP KUMAR: Yes.
>>REGINA: I mean, even
you're the first one
to say what we call allopathic
medicine or mainstream medicine
should be termed
complementary medicine.
>>KUMAR: Yes.
Allopathy and modern
medicine, what
I do in the ER, which is bread
and butter allopathy, right?
It's trauma.
It's heart attacks.
It's strokes.
That is complementary medicine.
And the whole idea that,
let's say, Ayurveda
or Chinese medicine or yoga
is complementary medicine
is completely wrong.
Complementary means it's
an addition to something.
And so when do you take pills,
or when do you take IV meds,
or when do you have surgery?
That's when the other
stuff doesn't work.
That's not a primary medicine.
>>REGINA: Exactly.
>>KUMAR: That's
complementary, right?
And the other way you
know it's complementary
is that if you take it
away, most people will still
be OK, right?
But if you take away primary
medicine-- nutrition, movement,
connection, and rest,
which are the fundamentals
of every system
around the world,
humans can't live
without nutrition,
movement, connection, and rest.
So that is by definition
primary medicine.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>KUMAR: And allopathy, what
I do, I'm proud of what I do,
you know?
This is not putting
down allopathy.
This is contextualizing and
saying exactly what it is.
It is the true
complementary medicine.
And when we see it that way,
our society will thrive.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
And the fact is many,
many, many lives
are saved every day
as a result of it.
We can't put that down.
There's a place for the ER.
I've been there
many times myself,
and had my own life saved
because of modern medicine
and allopathy.
But there were
upstream events that
trickled down to that moment.
>>KUMAR: Absolutely.
And it's such a beautiful and
important and powerful point
for everyone, for
allopaths, for everyone
who practices medicine, every
professional and every person
to know that this is not
putting down anybody.
This is actually
raising allopathy.
This is raising modern medicine
to what it is destined to be,
to what it can do better
than anything else, you know?
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>KUMAR: We have
to understand that.
>>REGINA: But we don't
understand everything else.
That's the problem.
>>KUMAR: That is the problem.
>>REGINA: And the doctors
aren't trained that way,
and they just see a person
with a few symptoms.
You get a couple
minutes with them.
You make a diagnosis, and
there's your treatment.
Gone.
And the person's still in the
same condition, more or less,
that brought them
there to begin with.
So I would like to go
back to your experience
when you were reading
that book that day
and what happened to you.
Now first of all, you were
running on no sleep, right?
[LAUGHS]
>>KUMAR: Yeah.
Yeah.
I was actually in medical
school at the time,
and I had come back
for a vacation,
and I was at my parents' place.
And yes, I was reading a book.
I was always into philosophy.
Since I was a child, I was
into philosophy and kind
of playing with my
mind and experimenting.
And there I was, reading a book.
And next thing I know, it was
like an explosion went off.
That's the only way
I can describe it.
Like, boom.
Everything went to smithereens.
And there I was in the
center of the sun, which
is such an odd thing to say.
I can't imagine that I would
ever have said that otherwise,
but nothing else seems right.
And I was there, sitting
there in the center
of the sun in this brilliant
orange saffron blaze.
Timeless, beautiful.
>>REGINA: Not hot.
>>KUMAR: Not hot.
Not burning, not scalding.
Just like the essence of
pleasantness and satisfaction.
>>REGINA: And almost--
and life-giving force.
>>KUMAR: Absolutely life-giving.
I mean, deathlessness.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>KUMAR: You know,
absolute deathlessness.
Everything you can imagine--
ease, beauty, perfection-- all
of these things kind of fall
short.
But in that moment, it
was as if every question
had dropped away.
All the restlessness--
I had experienced
restlessness in my life.
I was very unsatisfied with
school and what I was learning,
and it just seemed
so insufficient.
Everything just dropped away.
And then it was as if I
was going beyond that.
And I knew that I could
feel that if I kept going,
it would have been over.
There was no coming back.
It was just moving forward.
That was it.
>>REGINA: And there was
nothing physically wrong with
your body--
>>KUMAR: Oh, no.
>>REGINA: --at the time.
You were a healthy young man.
>>KUMAR: Yeah.
In fact, now when I think
back, I often think about,
what would the media have
said had I actually gone?
They would have said, medical
student did drugs and died,
or who knows what they
would have said, you know?
>>REGINA: Have to
find an excuse.
Physical, of course.
>>KUMAR: Right.
Right.
But I was-- no, I was
perfectly healthy.
But I knew that this was it.
One more step, and that was it.
And I was literally--
that foot metaphorically
was forward
when another kind of blaze
came up and instilled
this thought in my mind
that, this is not fair.
This wouldn't be fair.
There's more work to do.
Kind of like, not yet.
Not yet.
>>REGINA: But it
was tempting, right?
>>KUMAR: Like,
all my force was--
>>REGINA: [LAUGHS] Wanting
to go that direction.
>>KUMAR: All my force was
going in that direction.
But what I didn't
feel in that moment,
I think because of the
beauty of that experience,
was there was the
responsibility,
the obligations, you know?
And now what I know is what I
had come here for, all of that
was there, and I'm
so grateful for that.
And you know, that in a
sense is even more beautiful
than that experience,
I have to say,
because when this being
communicated this, it was like,
I had that foot
forward, and I stopped
before I put the foot
on the ground, kind of.
And then all those agreements,
those things to do,
et cetera, snapped me
back like a slingshot.
Back I came.
And there I was, sitting not
too dissimilar to this room,
in a room like this, in a chair.
The book was in front of me.
But everything had changed.
Everything had
changed at that point.
>>REGINA: So this is something
you had-- your soul arranged
for you so you could
have this experience
and know how
conscious the choices,
but also know the nature of
reality on the other side,
that all of us are on
some level tapped into,
but we don't remember.
>>KUMAR: Right.
And one thing I realized
then is that it's not just
the nature of reality
on the other side.
It's actually--
>>REGINA: This is our reality.
Of course.
>>KUMAR: It's
actually what this is.
That spilled over into this.
And then all the
restlessness had gone.
All the questions had gone.
I was like, OK.
I see.
>>REGINA: You know
what you're here for.
>>KUMAR: It was like drinking
and drinking and drinking,
and saying, I see, I see, I see.
And just a tremendous
fullness, you know?
>>REGINA: So how did it
work for you at that point?
So you're still in med school.
So you've got to
go back, and you've
got this grinding schedule
in your residency.
>>KUMAR: Right.
Right.
Well, so initially, you know,
I didn't really realize it
as I came back into that room--
you know, I was looking around
and I think just taking it in,
you know?
>>REGINA: You went to
the bathroom after that.
I remember that
part of the story.
>>KUMAR: I did because I
mean, I felt like a newborn.
I felt like a toddler
who had learned to walk.
You know how they cruise, they
hold on to things and walk?
I felt like that's--
I was kind of like--
because space appeared
different to me.
Space appeared as a thing to me.
I could feel space.
I knew what space was.
It was very intimate.
It wasn't like-- it wasn't just
something to put things into,
you know?
It was-- so I was
kind of doing this.
And then I walked
into the bathroom
and looked in the mirror,
and I was like, who
is this guy that seems so--
that person was way too
peaceful to be me, you know?
That person was way too content.
There were no questions.
There was no restlessness.
And then I remember moving
my face in different ways.
And then it was just
this kind of getting
to know what I am, my body
and the thought process.
Like, seeing how thoughts came
in, seeing how feelings arose.
And then I didn't
say anything, I
have to say, because
I had also been raised
in this tradition of Advaita,
this philosophy that had always
said, don't pay too much
attention to these things.
These things happen.
They're a part of the process.
Integrate.
Move forward, you know?
And so I didn't talk about this
for probably over 10 years,
15 years because I
was always taught,
don't get caught up in this.
And I think it was
great advice for me.
Now I talk about it
because I think it's--
I want to show people
what's possible.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>KUMAR: But I went
through a long period
of just integrating.
And like you said,
I went to residency.
I got married
shortly after that.
Then I started my residency
in emergency medicine
in Philadelphia.
Gunshot wounds and stab wounds
and heart attacks and strokes,
everything, up at all
hours of the night.
That's when it got
difficult. Until then--
because I was at the
end of med school
before, kind of
coasted a little bit.
Things were kind of
integrating in their own way.
But when I got to the
hospital, and it was like,
you have to do this,
this, this, this, this,
and it became very specific,
that became very challenging.
>>REGINA: And you're seeing
the most dire situations
that humanity experiences
in the middle of the night.
>>KUMAR: And I'm
feeling it intensely.
I'm feeling what these
people are feeling intensely.
>>REGINA: Did it
get to the point
where when these people came
in, whether it was a heart
attack or a gunshot wound,
as you said, that you
could see what had
precipitated it,
you could see their journey?
>>KUMAR: In the sense that
I could see that this was
a downstream event, you know?
I'll tell you this story.
There was one night in the ER
that was particularly nuts.
Usually Mondays and
Tuesdays evenings and nights
tend to be bad, and
especially in the summer--
>>REGINA: Monday and Tuesday?
You'd think Friday, Saturday.
>>KUMAR: No, it's-- people stay
home on the weekend and they
tend to get sicker, and then
on the Monday and Tuesday
they'll come in.
>>REGINA: OK.
>>KUMAR: And especially in
the summer on a warm day,
you can see a lot of trauma
when people-- when it's hot,
people tend to get more active.
And it was one of
those evenings,
one of those late nights.
And it was all kinds of gunshot
wounds and trauma and stab
wounds, and all these
kinds of things.
And then I remember,
just when you
thought it couldn't get worse,
a nurse ran in with a baby
into the resuscitation bay.
And everybody went
around this baby.
And of course, we
started doing everything.
And it was like a tornado,
everything whirling, all
the diagnoses, everybody
doing everything,
the different people coming in.
And then something happened
where it was like--
it was like someone pressed
Pause on everything,
and it was as though
everything stood still.
And it was as though
I went and sat down
in the corner of the
room with my legs folded
into a meditative state.
That's what it felt like.
And kind of saw
everything that happened.
And what came to me is we
have no idea what health is.
You know, that stood out
to me in that moment.
After seeing all of
these things come in that
were downstream events, far,
far, far downstream events.
But we have to look at what's
upstream, which is how we
are seeing ourselves, you know?
That's the true emergency.
That's the origin
of the emergency.
>>REGINA: That is.
And the thing is, it's going
to take a complete revamping.
And I know health revolution,
that is why you came back.
You came back to help create
a revolution in health
so that we do start with the
preceding factors on a soul
level, all the
way trickling down
to how we end up
with a stab wound
in the middle of the night.
>>KUMAR: Yes.
Yes.
And to me, that's really
a question of anatomy
because when we
talk about anatomy,
my anatomy atlas was called
"Atlas of Human Anatomy"
in medical school, right?
But it's not actually an
atlas of human anatomy.
It's an atlas of
human body anatomy.
>>REGINA: Body anatomy, yes.
>>KUMAR: And there's
a big difference
between complete human anatomy
and human body anatomy.
Again, like we said
about modern medicine
being complementary
medicine, human body anatomy
is extremely
important, but it has
to be contextualized in complete
human anatomy, which includes
mind, energy, soul,
spirit, information, all
of these things that live
at the boundaries of science
and philosophy and medicine
and our direct experience.
>>REGINA: How are we going--
OK, we'll get to that later.
How are we going to even
begin making this leap?
Because you were already--
you'd had your
spiritual experiences.
You were interested in
philosophy and the nature
of being, mind, et cetera.
So you were already primed
to take this revolution
on as an allopathic
complementary doctor.
>>KUMAR: Yes.
>>REGINA: The others
aren't for the most part.
Very few are.
And I want to talk about--
I wanted to ask a little bit,
are you seeing a difference
in the motivations of young
people coming into medicine
today versus a while back?
But we'll get to
that in a minute
because one of the things--
you were also experiencing
kind of multiple timelines
at one point, and you see
these different-- talk to us
about how these timelines
exist alongside another
and one expresses and
plays out versus another.
>>KUMAR: When we come
into this lifetime,
we come in with almost
like a few seeds
sprouting out of a whole
bag of seeds, you know?
And so a few seeds--
so in this lifetime,
we express in this
particular way.
In other lifetimes, we
expressed in other ways.
And the way I see
it, these lifetimes
are not necessarily sequential.
It's not that one has
to finish and then
another one starts,
and then another one
starts because again, as we move
towards complete human anatomy,
we're not just a body, and
we're not just a local thinking
mind and local emotions.
If we were, then it
would have to be,
OK, I have to experience this.
Then I can experience that.
But actually, this is a
projection of our deeper
nature, of our deeper self.
And our deeper self is
not in this timeline.
It's not in this linear time.
And so it can be having other
experiences in other timelines
as this part of our self
is having this experience
in this timeline.
>>REGINA: And you felt at one
point that you had projected
or you were on a
path, a timeline that
was really far into the future
of humanity at one point.
>>KUMAR: Yes.
So this gets into the
nature of dimensions.
In one sense, we can talk--
we can say, we're in a place
right now.
We're in Boulder, Colorado.
We're in a physical
studio, for example.
That's true.
But when you look
beyond the physical,
this is actually a
perceptual experience
that we are cognitively
stitching together and saying,
this is a hard physical
experience, right?
>>REGINA: An agreed
upon kind of reality.
>>KUMAR: Right.
It's kind of like a consensus
reality that we have.
So when we zoom out a little
bit and step back a little bit,
this is actually in a simpler
sense a dimensional experience.
This is a dimension that we are
co-creating and experiencing
right now.
And what we call other
planets or other places
are also other dimensions
because they're happening
at different time scales.
Everything in this
dimension is vibrating
at a particular frequency.
And so if you change
the frequency,
it's a different dimension.
So what we think
about as civilizations
on other planets, of which
there are numerous, innumerable,
many of them are vibrating
at different frequencies
so they don't experience
time the same way.
Just like a moth might
live a day or two,
and that's a complete
lifetime for them, you know?
Galapagos turtle might be
100 years or 200 years.
That's their timeline.
And yet, they're all lifetimes.
And so when we change
our frequency--
which, we are all
frequency machines and we
all have that ability--
then we access
what are called other
dimensions or other places.
And yes, one of those
was, I would say,
something like a crystal city
in which the architecture
is totally different.
If you think about
our world, the way
I think about our
world, if I had
to say one thing about our
world, it's 90 degrees.
Look everywhere.
It's 90 degrees.
>>REGINA: 90 degrees.
>>KUMAR: You know?
Like, it's squares.
>>REGINA: That is true.
>>KUMAR: And that represents
a way of thinking.
It represents if/and or
if/then, this or that thinking.
Because you have a
straight line, and then
you come to this way or that
way like the top of a pillar
or the corner of a room.
You go down, and it's
this way or that way.
It's actually a
mentality that sees--
it's either this or it's that.
But when you get into
spherical architecture, when
you get to pyramidal
architecture
where you have convergence
points, then what you have is,
for example, a type of thinking
that says that all of this
goes to the same place, right?
That understanding is there and
implicit in that architecture,
or in curved,
spherical architecture
where the rooms are more
curved rather than cornered.
It's that all of this
circulates within ourselves.
This all comes back to us.
That's the underlying thinking,
rather than it's either this
or it's that.
>>REGINA: Yeah, no,
that's interesting
because when I've gone off
on trips into the deep past,
I was in very spherical
environments that
had no electricity
as we know it,
but we were able-- they
glowed almost from the inside.
And to crystal places,
crystal cities.
Many years ago I used
to go regularly to one,
and it was a very different
kind of experience and thinking
at the time.
And so these can be anywhere.
They can be our past.
They can be our future.
In a sense, it all
collapses into now
for the purposes of
what we're doing.
But I just want to
add this one thing
because I love it so
much about Rudolf Steiner
and the Waldorf system, is
that until the kids, I think,
are in 4th or--
4th grade, all the
corners are cut off.
Every paper they
interface with has
to have rounded corners to
keep the creativity alive
while they're young.
>>KUMAR: Yes, absolutely.
>>REGINA: I mean, this to me
is so brilliant and critical.
>>KUMAR: If we designed rooms
not radically differently,
but just so the
corners are rounded--
>>REGINA: In hospitals--
>>KUMAR: --it would change.
>>REGINA: It would
change everything.
>>KUMAR: And the other
thing about time,
you said it can be our past.
It can be our future.
Yes, exactly.
Because all these experiences
come in as we attend to them.
So we consider this the
present, which it is.
But as soon as we go
deeply into an experience,
that becomes our present
and this becomes the past.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>KUMAR: So rather than sticking
with some artificial timeline,
we came up with a number.
The Year 0 was 2,023
years ago, right?
But it's rather arbitrary.
If you look at the
seasons, they're cyclical.
If you look at January,
February, March, it's cyclical.
If you look at the
weeks, it's cyclical.
If you look at the year, the
Earth going around the sun,
it's cyclical.
So why do we have
years that are linear?
It makes no sense.
What we should be
doing is labeling that
based on how the
sun is revolving
around the center of the galaxy.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
>>KUMAR: Yeah.
And I had a guest yesterday.
Christopher Bache who
wrote the book "LSD
and the Mind of the Universe,"
and had these incredible
experiences similar to what
you're sharing with me.
I was kind of hoping you two
would be here at the same time
and could meet.
It didn't work out.
But one thing he
was explaining is
that when it was
all said and done,
regardless of which dimension,
timeline you were in,
nirvana equated to having
absolute full presence in where
you are now, in the moment
and where you are now.
How do you relate to that?
>>KUMAR: So what we can say
is the nature of things,
let's say, is light, OK?
And that is just not the
nature of physical things.
It's the nature of thought.
It's the nature of emotion.
It's the nature of space.
Light is what diffuses as space.
And if that's true,
then no matter
how far out we can think
or imagine or experience,
some planet in
some other galaxy,
way in the past, way in
the future, or right here,
or what we said a
few moments ago,
it's actually all constructed
from and structured in light.
And so nirvana then
is this experience
of our nature as
light because that's
what defines the word here.
When we say here, I am
here, what does that mean?
That means my
identity is immovable.
It is here.
Everything else moves
and rotates and revolves
like the sun around
the center of the Milky
Way or all the galaxies.
All of that revolves
in my light.
>>REGINA: At this
point of light.
>>KUMAR: Yes, where that my is
this infinite nature, right?
So that's nirvana because
until that becomes clear,
there's always
going to be wanting
to explore other dimensions,
because it's cool.
It's amazing.
It's fantastic.
And we should.
We can, right?
That's our potential.
>>REGINA: And
there's a lot to be--
>>KUMAR: But that shouldn't
be from a place of lack.
It should be from
a place of fullness
and, how amazing
is this, you know?
>>REGINA: I agree.
OK.
So now, we had talked before.
There are so many ways we
can go in this conversation.
But one of them was about
these experiences people have
and the notion of mental health
in the world of allopathy.
What happens to people who
see things differently?
You end up in a psych ward.
You end up on medications.
And a very large percentage
of our population
is drugged right now,
including the kids.
>>KUMAR: Yes.
>>REGINA: People watching are
on various mood-altering drugs.
>>KUMAR: Yes.
>>REGINA: Their kids may be
on Ritalin, and so forth.
>>KUMAR: Yes.
>>REGINA: So let's
talk about that
for a moment, the
notion of mind not
fitting into a specific
model, behavior
not fitting into a
specific model when
so much is changing so rapidly.
>>KUMAR: I mean, it's such
a huge and important topic.
I think it's one of the
most important topics
today in the world.
I'll just start
with my experience.
When my experience
started opening up,
I was so fortunate to
have three anchor points.
One was I had studied this
philosophy for decades prior
to that, for a couple decades,
or more than one decade easily.
I had been around people who
made this their life, who
had been through this
and more, and who
had been integrating this.
I also had the
perspective of a doctor.
I knew how-- I'd done
my psych rotation.
I knew how doctors think.
I know the model, right?
And I also had someone who
had been through it near me
who I could ask questions to.
So when this happened to
me, as difficult as it
was-- and it was really hard the
first six months of residency
when all the stuff
was happening.
Sometimes I was
outside the body.
Sometimes I was in the body.
Sometimes I was
with the patient.
Sometimes I was somewhere else.
And night and day started
to go up and down.
Things were so wild and
needed so much integration
that I could have easily been
diagnosed with any range of--
>>REGINA: Schizophrenia [LAUGHS]
>>KUMAR: Schizophrenia, bipolar
with psychotic features,
depression.
I mean, you name it.
It could be anything.
But I never thought
about it that way.
The way I thought
about it is, this
is a really important sentinel
experience in this lifetime,
and let me integrate this.
There was never any
negative-- there was never
any thought of disease.
There were never any thought of
illness or anything like that.
It was just a difficult process
that I had to integrate.
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm.
>>KUMAR: And that
is so critical.
And I knew what to say to whom.
I knew-- to this
person, don't say this.
It will terrify them
too much, and they
have to start-- they have to
start thinking about illness,
you know?
This person will just think it's
crazy, so don't even bother.
So I started to develop a
language and a strategy--
>>REGINA: Well, and
you had discernment.
>>KUMAR: And I had discernment.
Yes, absolutely.
And I knew--
I had my own story
for what was happening
that was really helpful, and
that's where that three minds
framework came from.
But then I also saw with
a lot of my patients
that they were going
through something like this.
When you don't know the
nature of the mind, in my view
you can't really talk
about mental illness.
It's mental illness.
Mind, illness.
But in allopathy, we
don't know what mind is.
Mind is not a physical thing.
Our model of
anatomy is physical.
So what are we really--
where's the knowledge
base for that?
That's what I'm
talking about now.
There is a place for
medication, absolutely.
And you know, I've seen this
happen in my own family.
I've seen it with others.
There is a place for
medication, but it
has to be medication as
a temporizing measure
while our own
knowledge base helps
us bring this person
along and integrate this.
Medication from a place of
ignorance where I don't even
know what mind is is
basically suppressing a person
and not allowing them
to integrate fully
into their life.
So there has to be a role for
medication with knowledge.
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm.
And so some of the
things that land people
in a situation where they're
given medication or put
into a psychiatric ward are--
we have three little things
that we talked about off camera.
And one of them is people
who are actually seeing
into other dimensions and very
confused at what's going on.
>>KUMAR: Yes.
Right?
So this gets into hallucinations
versus what's not.
And for me, I don't
know that there
is a place or a need for
the word hallucination.
We have gotten to a
place in neuroscience
where we understand
that the world is
a kind of collective
hallucination, where
we are kind of co-constructing
what we see, you know?
The brain basically has ion
signals, sodium and potassium
channels, that are flowing
to the occipital cortex that
takes in light and then
constructs the image.
It's not seeing what's here.
It's seeing interpretations
of reflections of light.
So what is actually
here is up for grabs.
Nobody really knows, right?
So for me to say that this
person is hallucinating I think
takes a tremendous
amount of arrogance.
What I can say is
you're perceiving
something I'm not perceiving.
That's fair.
The question is, what is the
meaning of that in your life?
You're perceiving something--
>>REGINA: But these
aren't the questions
that are asked when
they end up in the ER
when a concerned
relative brings them in.
>>KUMAR: No, because we have a
paradigm based in the physical.
And the idea is the
brain creates the mind.
What everybody sees is
what you should see.
And you have to be like
me, so let me medicate
you to be like me, you know?
And that's the problem.
But we have to start
looking into these things
where we get to the
point where we say,
we're seeing different
things, but the question
is, is it working for you?
What's the relevance
in your life?
If this perception--
>>REGINA: It's tearing
your life apart--
yeah.
>>KUMAR: --then let's
look at its meaning
and find out how
to integrate that.
>>REGINA: Right.
Well, we're not there yet.
That's kind of where
you're hoping we end up
over the decades ahead.
Another area is when people
are seeing actual entities
or beings or having
them talk to them
from either other
dimensions or other places.
>>KUMAR: Yes.
So this has happened to me
where if my frequency goes
to a certain place, I
start accessing other,
let's say, beings,
other entities.
And they can talk, and
there's a strategy.
There's a way to deal with it.
Like, if you don't
attend to it that much,
then it's not a factor.
If you want to engage, then you
can consciously engage, right?
These beings that are all
around us are, in a sense,
just like people.
They're quote, unquote
"good people," "bad people,"
everything in between.
Everybody has their
biases, their interests,
what they want to do.
And that's not just
true of us Homo sapiens.
That's true of all
kinds of species.
>>REGINA: From all dimensions.
>>KUMAR: --across the spectrum.
Yes.
So just like we
learn how to deal
with each other in
our social culture,
we learn how to deal
with other beings.
And we know how to open a
channel or close it off or say,
no, I don't want that, or yes,
I would like this interaction.
And it's all just
so normal, you know?
>>REGINA: It is normal,
until something happens
that makes it very
abnormal where somebody
is being interfered-- something
is going on in their own field.
They're very permeable and open.
>>KUMAR: Yes.
>>REGINA: Whatever
the setup emotionally,
they're now being
told by some entity,
you need to take out these kids
at that school, or whatever.
>>KUMAR: Yes.
But a major reason why things
become dysfunctional like that
is because of the
ignorance in our society.
So when you think this kind of
communication cannot happen,
it's abnormal, it's
hallucination, it's illness,
then what happens is you have
to veer off onto your own path.
You don't really have help.
You can't talk to anybody.
And--
>>REGINA: You know you're
hearing something and being
given instructions, and
no one believes you.
>>KUMAR: Exactly.
It's like a kid who meets
a stranger that might
want to take advantage of them.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>KUMAR: What do strangers do?
They kind of isolate you.
You can't talk to anybody.
And then you can kind
of fall prey to that.
And it's the same thing here.
If everybody's saying, that
doesn't happen, that's crazy,
don't talk about that,
then you're all alone.
But if everybody says,
you know what? this
happens all the time, everybody
experiences this, now all
of the sudden you
can talk to people
and you're not so vulnerable
to these influences.
>>REGINA: Yes.
And again, I think having
the discernment-- well,
in general a sense of
well-being enough to know,
you know, that's not a
productive message that I'm
hearing from whomever this is.
>>KUMAR: Exactly.
>>REGINA: I think I'm going
to close the door on that one.
>>KUMAR: Right.
I have that ability.
>>REGINA: Where does it
take you in your life?
To a higher place
or to a lower place?
So that's really
simple when it comes
to engaging with entities.
But I think
recently, there was--
in 2023, there was a
mass shooting event
that was so sad because the
man knew he was troubled.
He was saying, I'm troubled.
He was saying, I
think I need help.
He was laying it all out.
No one did a darn thing.
There were even laws in
place for that situation.
Everybody ignored it.
And of course, a lot of
people died as a result.
Now, that's a failure
of every sys--
we know we're having
failures of systems.
Your comment on that?
>>KUMAR: My comment on that
is that the reason we are
so terrible at dealing with
emotions-- that's basically
an emotional thing.
This person was having
emotional disturbances--
>>REGINA: Extreme emotional--
>>KUMAR: --trauma.
We don't like to deal
with that in our society.
Why?
Again, it's a downstream effect.
Once you say that we are
atomic creatures, that we
are physical things,
that the brain comes
first and everything
else, then what happens
is emotions and all that stuff
is stuff to be controlled.
It's not stuff to experience.
It's not stuff that enlivens us.
It's to be controlled
and put in a corner.
And so even for so
many professionals
that's the case, right?
Not coming to terms
with our emotions,
not reaching that vast
place in ourselves
contextualizes the physical
and gives us that ability
to deal with all
of these things,
that allows us to break down
the boundaries in ourselves
because we see ourselves
as so much more,
and then we can handle
all the trauma, you know?
It's not so difficult.
Otherwise, we
have to keep our
boundaries up so stiff.
And when somebody
else is experiencing
something difficult,
I can't go near that.
>>REGINA: And to be trained
to hold space for one another,
and to know, it's OK.
It doesn't mean you're
unsafe because somebody is
having a meltdown or whatnot.
>>KUMAR: That's exactly right
because we are capable enough
of holding even that because we
are not just physical things,
and emotions are not
supposed to be controlled.
They're supposed to be
experienced, processed as part
of our human experience.
>>REGINA: OK, let's get
into this for just a moment
because one of the final
areas was our own fears
and emotions being projected
onto some future reality that
hasn't happened, and
we start breaking down.
So let's say that's
happening with someone.
They become overwhelmed
by something,
and they're starting
to appear mentally
unstable to those around them.
In a case like that,
for every one of us,
what would you say is probably
the most productive way
to engage with them?
And I know it's
all very different.
>>KUMAR: Yeah, it is
all very different,
but what comes to mind is space,
compassion, and curiosity.
>>REGINA: Inquiry.
Listen.
>>KUMAR: Yeah.
It's saying, I see you.
You're having an experience.
I'm having an experience.
And what's happening in
your experience, you know?
Rather than putting a
value judgment on it.
>>REGINA: Or saying,
calm down, calm down.
There's nothing to be afraid of.
>>KUMAR: I'll give you a
story that happened in the ER
many years ago.
There was a person that
came in who was suicidal.
It was a gentleman, a
middle-aged gentleman.
And I asked him, I said,
hey, I'm Dr. Kumar.
Tell me what's going on.
And then he started talking.
And he said, you know,
Doc, you know, I just--
I feel like killing myself.
And you know, it's hard at home.
And you know, my wife
is always hard on me.
And it's like, I'm trying, and
I'm trying to pay the bills.
I'm trying to hold it together,
but nothing is working.
And at some point when he
started talking, maybe 20,
30 seconds into it, I
got this kind of message,
which was just like, just
let him talk and don't--
there's no need to
say anything, right?
And now in the ER, you
have to understand,
at any moment you could get
called because something
else just came in, right?
So you never know
when you're going
to have 12 seconds, 20
seconds, three minutes.
But somehow I had maybe seven,
eight minutes with this person.
And I just let him talk.
And he talked, and he cried,
and he talked, and he cried,
and he talked, and he cried.
And at the end,
there was a release.
And then he said, thanks, Doc.
And I hadn't done anything
in terms of saying anything,
but I had held space,
and that was healing.
>>REGINA: Right.
>>KUMAR: And you asked
me what I would do.
You know, I think that's the
biggest thing, is give people
space because I think--
>>REGINA: Don't be afraid.
>>KUMAR: --there is
an intelligence here.
There's an
intelligence in space.
There's an intelligence
in relationship
that is so far deeper and more
powerful than conceptual and
verbal intelligence.
So I would say, allow
that to come in.
>>REGINA: Yeah.
Perfect.
And so also, there was a woman--
I wanted to get to that.
Because of the way you see
things when you're in the ER
and you can feel the kind of
preceding events in one's life
that brought them there,
there was an old woman
in delicate condition
that came in one time
that we were talking
about a while back.
Tell us a little bit
about that experience
and who you were able
to show up as to her.
>>KUMAR: It was such a
beautiful experience, Regina.
It was my intern year.
So I had been dealing
with all of these things
that I told you I was dealing
with, not knowing what is up
and what is down.
I still remember, I had
a fresh white coat on.
I mean, it was starched.
It was crisp, to the
point where you're like,
this person has no experience.
That coat is way
too clean, you know?
And I went to see this
lady with abdominal pain.
I think she was in her 80s.
She was an elderly lady.
And she was in a
stretcher, laying back.
Her head-- the stretcher
was almost flat, I think.
Maybe just a little
bit of angle.
And I walked in, this
clumsy, like, fresh intern--
>>REGINA: Kid.
>>KUMAR: Yeah, a kid.
You know, I'm 20-something.
She's 80-something.
Like, what am I going to
teach this person about life,
you know?
And so I said--
again, I said,
hello, I'm Dr. Kumar.
Tell me what's happening.
And it was just quiet.
Like, no response, you know?
And then she slowly kind
of raised herself up,
and she was kind of
trembling, I remember, right?
So her head's trembling.
Her body's trembling.
And then she starts to reach
out a trembling hand like this.
And I had a clipboard then.
This was before we moved to
the electronic medical record.
I had a clipboard and a pen.
And she reached out for my hand.
And so I gave her my hand.
She took my hand,
and she looked at me,
and she's like,
you are so loving.
And it was one of the most
deep, beautiful, true moments,
maybe the most of my
medical career so far.
In that moment--
I'm getting goosebumps.
In that moment, I knew
she was 100% right.
100% right.
Whereas some other
times, we might
be tempted to say, oh, no,
you know, I'm not that loving.
But I felt the
falseness in that--
in that kind of
response, and I just
felt the truth in what she said.
I was like, I knew.
I was like, yes, I
am incredibly loving.
And I also knew I
was incredibly loved.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>KUMAR: You know?
And I knew this person--
>>REGINA: She could see you.
>>KUMAR: --was a messenger
of love also, right?
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>KUMAR: And so we stood
frozen in that moment,
and then everything
went to light.
Everything went to light.
I don't remember a single thing
after that, of that night,
of anything else.
But the amount of gratitude
and love I have for her
is inexpressible because in a
sense, I needed that so badly.
>>REGINA: You needed
to be recognized
in the heat of the ER.
>>KUMAR: I needed that.
With everything I was going
through in that moment,
I needed that.
And that kind of showed
me how much I could do
and what I could do.
>>REGINA: Mm-hmm.
So now we come to kind
of the big picture.
Health revolution, systems
revolution has to happen.
We all know that.
Where do we even begin?
And are you seeing
any kind of change
in the nature of the young
people coming into medicine
today for better or worse?
>>KUMAR: Yeah.
We definitely are seeing it.
We're definitely
seeing a change.
I mean, look at
the system today.
You can't go to a
major medical center
without there being an
integrative medicine
program or a complementary
medicine program.
All the major medical
schools have it.
That itself, there is a
seismic shift happening.
Now, we don't fully
understand what that is.
We don't understand the basis of
that science, which is actually
the primacy of consciousness.
>>REGINA: Well, doesn't the
doctor usually say, well,
you can go over and
get some-- you're
covered for a few
acupuncture sessions,
and let us know how it goes.
>>KUMAR: Because it's still a
materialist physical framework
and they're trying to do
this as an addendum, right?
But rather than
seeing consciousness
as fundamental and primary
and physicality as expression,
which then holds
all of medicine,
all of healing, all systems
around the world beautifully.
So yes, it is changing, and
people now are changing.
The people coming
in are changing.
They're open to more ideas.
I see it even in my
younger colleagues.
They're actually
interested-- one of my books
is called "Is This a Dream?" and
they're like, oh, interesting,
you know?
And the other one's
"Michelangelo's Medicine."
Oh, interesting.
What's that about?
They're much more open-minded
and curious about what
this means.
And they know there's more
than this medical system,
but not knowing yet
how to integrate it.
So yes, I see a lot of hope.
I see a lot of change happening.
The huge step now, which
is what I'm here for,
is now to shift from a model
of the primacy of the body
and matter to a model where
consciousness is fundamental
and expresses as the body.
>>REGINA: Absolutely.
You've talked with
Deepak Chopra about this,
I know, on one of his
programs, and you're
speaking to many people
through many venues about this.
And I mean, I see you as a voice
that's going to rise and rise
because it's
absolutely necessary.
And you chose to come back from
taking that step into the light
to do this very thing.
But there's another
thing that has to occur.
And oftentimes,
the negative side
as a customer or client
of the medical industry, I
become very frustrated at the
arrogance of thinking they
know my body better than I do.
And they have a few
minutes with me,
and they're going to
tell me what's needed.
I don't like that, and
nor does anybody else
where you feel you're
not being heard.
Is there a step in here
somewhere where people
can start making
themselves heard and known
to their doctors,
or is it impossible
because of the nature
of the HMO where you get
five minutes with a patient?
>>KUMAR: At the level--
so at the level
of being a human,
the doctor and the
patient are the same.
We're both humans.
We both have emotions, feelings,
desires, strengths, weaknesses,
everything, right?
And then there's your
training on top of that.
So the patient is
actually a kind of role
that a person takes on, right?
The patient role.
When I have a
certain experience,
and now that
experience is framed
in the context of a symptom of
a disease, that's kind of a role
the person takes.
And the doctor then also
takes on a certain training
to be a doctor.
So you have the human
beings and you have
the roles that they're playing.
The role of the doctor
is grossly undereducated.
>>REGINA: Yes.
>>KUMAR: That's the problem.
And this gets back to anatomy.
When you're
experiencing yourself,
you don't experience
yourself as primarily a body.
So--
>>REGINA: It's a
multidimensional experience.
>>KUMAR: How many people hearing
this right now are experiencing
their left third toe?
>>REGINA: Yeah.
>>KUMAR: Almost nobody,
unless you have pain there.
But if you look at an anatomy
textbook, it's right there.
If you look at the same anatomy
textbook, love is not there.
Fear is not there.
Hope is not there.
Ambition is not there.
Possibility is not there.
Potential is not there.
>>REGINA: Soul is not there.
>>KUMAR: Soul is not there.
But the way we experience
ourselves, like,
what people are
experiencing right now
is probably curiosity or
wonder or doubt or possibility.
That's what people are
experiencing as themselves.
Not the third toe, not the
liver, not the left nostril,
not the right eyelid, right?
So there's a huge
discrepancy between how
the doctor is trained
to see us and how
we are experiencing ourselves.
And that's what needs to
be reconciled with a more
complete model of anatomy.
In terms of what
we can do now, it
has to be a doctor who
is seeing themselves
primarily as a human
being, who has a training
rather than strictly as a
doctor, because then you
can associate with more
of what this person is.
And also, the person
who's being seen, staying
grounded in who they are
and not allowing themselves
to be seen as only a body.
Both are needed.
That's what we can
do immediately,
and that's a challenge
because of the training today.
>>REGINA: So when you have--
you see the young docs in the ER
now, are you able in
any kind of active way
to subtly teach or
participate with them
to see the person in front
of them as more than a body?
>>KUMAR: So before the pandemic,
we were doing meditations
when we would explore this.
So there would be--
>>REGINA: In the hospital?
>>KUMAR: In the hospital.
>>REGINA: Wonderful.
>>KUMAR: I was
doing meditations.
And we would talk about--
we might pick a
topic like harmony
and then talk about what
that's like in an ER, which
seems to be so disharmonic
in many ways, right?
>>REGINA: So chaotic.
>>KUMAR: Or even balance.
What does balance mean?
And talk about that in
the context of an ER.
So we were doing those
kinds of sessions.
Post-pandemic, we
have not done those,
but I tend to have private
conversations with--
when you're working
with a colleague about--
and it generally takes
the form of wellness
or it takes the form of--
about meditation.
But where all of this
is going ultimately
is a deeper, more
complete model of anatomy
and the nature of consciousness.
>>REGINA: So how do you
see, in your biggest
dream and your life playing out,
your role in what you can do?
>>KUMAR: My role is twofold.
One, to make it safe for
people to see consciousness
as fundamental,
because it's scary,
and people think it's
irrational, and people think it
contradicts science, all
of which are false, right?
It actually enhances
science, and it actually
enhances our own potential
and possibility of healing
and so much else.
That's one, to give
people an off-ramp
from the insanity of
the primacy of matter
and the primacy of the body.
Second, having taken
that off-ramp to then
start to experience this because
that's where I like to live.
That's where I live.
And so if you meet me
here, we can explore this
and live in this together and
make this space for everyone.
>>REGINA: I love it.
I love what you're doing.
Thank you for coming back from
that glorious saffron light.
[LAUGHTER]
And I know we're going to
have more conversations
because you're building
a lot right now.
So when we go to your website,
it's under your name, right?
That's easy enough.
>>KUMAR: Healthrevolution.org.
>>REGINA: Oh, OK.
OK.
>>KUMAR: Healthrevolution.org
is where I'm focused right now.
Yes.
>>REGINA: Very good.
OK.
And then again, people can find
your books there and elsewhere.
So thank you, Dr. Kumar, so
much for joining us today.
I've really been looking
forward to this conversation
and to your newest
book coming out.
>>KUMAR: Thank you, Regina.
>>REGINA: To follow Dr. Kumar,
you can go to his website
at healthrevolution.org
where you can find his blogs
on consciousness and healing.
Meanwhile, we're going
to have Dr. Kumar back
to discuss the ideas for a true
health revolution, which we all
need to be part of, one that
gives human beings the courage
to have faith in the genius of
their own body, mind, heart,
and soul.
Until next time, thank
you for joining us here
on "Open Minds."
[THEME MUSIC]